{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 AmericanTypewriter-Bold;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 AmericanTypewriter;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{none\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'00;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww11600\viewh21600\viewkind1
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Mass storage\
\

\f1\b0 seek time: moving arm to desired cylinder time\
\
rotational latency: time for desired sector to rotate under the disk head\
\
\
How to calculate 7200 rpm to latency?\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sa240\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 \cb2 (1/ (rpm/60)) / 2\cb1 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
SDD may have shorter life span than HDD, how?\
\
\
logical blocks corresponds to sectors in HDDs.\
\
Different ways to organize logical blocks: \
FCFS scheduling: serve the blocks as they come. \
SSTF (shortest seek time first): serve the closest block, but may cause starvation because it may not serve the blocks far away.\
\
SCAN: serve the blocks at one end of the disk, and then moves toward the other end. \
LOOK: doesn\'92t serve the limits, a version of SCAN\
\
\
C-SCAN: serves until to the end of the disk and then returns the beginning of the disk to serve the blocks not served.  \
C-LOOK: a version of C-SCAN\
\
File-allocation method and metadata layout does effect how to determine which scheduling to select. \
\
\

\f0\b Recapitulation\
\

\f1\b0 - user mode to kernel mode (timer, interrupt-driven)\
\
- cpu switch from a process to another.\
\
- scheduling methods (Round robin, FCFS, SJF)\
\
- segmentation. each process have its own segment table which consists of limit and base. base is where we start from, limit the size of segment. \
\
- paging. each process have its own page table consisting page number and page offset. TLB (translation look-aside buffer) consists of page number and frame number. \
page fault. when the page is not in the ram or the ram was not big enough.\
different algorithms to access the pages e.g. FIFO, and so on.\

\f0\b File concept\

\f1\b0 \
\
\
\
\
\
\
}